README.md, before:

# Using Notebooks for Climate Data Analysis

Welcome to the IS-ENES3 tutorials and use cases repository for the ENES Climate Analytics Services [ECAS](https://portal.enes.org/data/data-metadata-service/climate-analytics-service): 
- for the ECAS provided by the German Climate Computing Center [DKRZ](https://www.dkrz.de/) (xarray and dask back-end): find in this repo the training material; we continuously create more material, check the institutional [repo](https://gitlab.dkrz.de/mipdata/tutorials-and-use-cases),
- for the ECAS provided by the Euro-Mediterranean Centre for Climate Change [CMCC](https://ecaslab.cmcc.it/web/home.html) (Ophidia back-end): find the training material in this other [repo](https://github.com/ECAS-Lab/ecas-training).
Find more information on how to apply for the service and get an ECAS account at the [ECAS website](https://portal.enes.org/data/data-metadata-service/climate-analytics-service).

In the "notebooks" folder here you can find [Jupyter](https://jupyter.org/) notebooks with coding examples showing how to use Big Data and High-Performance Computing software at DKRZ. 


## Notebooks

[![NBViewer](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jupyter/design/master/logos/Badges/nbviewer_badge.svg)](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/IS-ENES-Data/Climate-data-analysis-service/tree/main/)

We prepared a tutorial on how to use [Intake](https://intake.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) in the DKRZ data pool and several notebooks with use cases. They are independent, just pick up those showing the content you are interested on:

1. **Multimodel Comparison of CMIP6 models**
  * use Python to select data in data-pool,
  * use [python-cdo](https://pypi.org/project/cdo/) and [Xarray](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/) for computation.
2. **Frost Days climate index with CMIP6 models**
  * use [Intake](https://intake.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to search data in data-pool,
  * use [Xarray](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/) for computation.
3. **Summer Days climate index with CMIP6 models**
  * This is an **advanced** notebook. It requires additional installations steps (that is, your own environment to be seen as a kernel at the Jupyterhub, see section "Advanced" below).
  * use [Folium](https://pypi.org/project/folium/) for maps,
  * use [hvPlot](https://pypi.org/project/hvplot/) for plots.
4. **Simple visualization examples for CMIP6**
  * use [Cartopy](https://scitools.org.uk/cartopy/docs/latest/) and [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/) for visualization.
5. **Using ESMValtool directly accessing the DKRZ CMIP and ERA data pool**
  * to reproduce or re-use existing climate analytics, more info [here](https://www.esmvaltool.org/). This is an **advanced** notebook. It requires additional installations steps (that is, your own environment to be seen as a kernel at the Jupyterhub, see section "Advanced" below).


The Jupyter notebooks are meant to run in the [Jupyterhub](https://jupyterhub.dkrz.de/) server of the German Climate Computing Center [DKRZ](https://www.dkrz.de/) which is an [ESGF](https://esgf.llnl.gov/) repository that hosts 4 petabytes of [CMIP6](https://pcmdi.llnl.gov/CMIP6/) model data (more info on the data pool [here](https://www.dkrz.de/up/services/data-management/cmip-data-pool)).

Do not try to run these notebooks in your premise, which is also known as [client-side](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Client-side) computing. It will fail because you will not have direct access to the data pool. Direct access to the data pool is one of the main benefits of the [server-side](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Server-side) data-near computing demonstrated in these tutorials and use cases :relaxed:.


## Quick start

You will *only* need a browser to install and run the above notebooks.

1. Open the [DKRZ Jupyterhub](https://jupyterhub.dkrz.de) in your browser.
2. Login with your DKRZ account (if you do not have one account yet, follow steps 1 and 2 in the service [ECAS website](https://portal.enes.org/data/data-metadata-service/climate-analytics-service#DKRZ)). 
3. Pick a profile (``Preset -> Start from Preset Profile``). You need a **prepost** node. Choose profile ``5GB memory, prepost``. 

    > NOTE: Everytime you run the notebook you will use some of that RAM, we recomend to click on ``Kernel -> Shutdown kernel`` often so the memory is released. If you   want to run several notebooks at the same time or one notebook several times and you cannot shoutdown the kernel each time, please, choose a job profile with a larger memory.
4. Press "start" and your Jupyter server will start (which it is also known as spawning).
5. Open a terminal in Jupyter (``New -> Terminal``, on the right side)
6. A terminal window opens on the node where your Jupyter is running.
7. Clone the notebooks from GitHub:
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/IS-ENES-Data/Climate-data-analysis-service.git
```
8. Go back to your Jupyter and open a notebook from the notebooks folder:
```
Climate-data-analysis-service/notebooks/
```
9. Make sure you use the Jupyter ``Python 3 unstable`` kernel (``Kernel -> Change Kernel``).


### Alternative

Instead of using the terminal in Jupyter, you can also login to the DKRZ supercomputer *Mistral*:
```console
$ ssh myaccount@mistral.dkrz.de
```

And clone the notebooks repository from GitHub:
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/IS-ENES-Data/Climate-data-analysis-service.git
```

Then, the notebooks will be visible from the Jupyterhub.


## Advanced

The notebook to calculate *summer days* needs its own Jupyter kernel:

1. Open the terminal and run a script to make a new kernel:
```console
$ bash make_kernel.sh
```
2. ... it takes a couple of minutes ...
3. When done then go to you Jupyter and choose the new Kernel we just created ``Notebook Demo``.
4. Now you can run also the *summer days* notebook.


### Further Infos

* Find more in the DKRZ Jupyterhub [documentation](https://jupyterhub.gitlab-pages.dkrz.de/jupyterhub-docs/index.html).
* *prepost* nodes at DKRZ have internet access [info](https://www.dkrz.de/up/systems/mistral/running-jobs/partitions-and-limits).
* ``Python 3 unstable`` kernel: This kernel already contains all the common geoscience packages that we need for our notebooks.
* See in this [video](https://youtu.be/f0wZX9i0uWQ) the main features of the DKRZ Jupterhub and how to use it.
* Advanced users developing their own notebooks can find there how to create their own environments that are visible as kernels by the Jupyterhub.

Besides the information on the Jupyterhub, in these DKRZ [docs](https://www.dkrz.de/up/systems/mistral/programming/jupyter-notebook) you can find how to run Jupyter notebooks directly in the DKRZ server, that is, out of the Jupyterhub (it entails that you install the geoscience packages you need).


## Exercises
In this hands-on we will find, analyze and visualize data from our DKRZ data pool. The goal is to create two  maps, which show the number of tropical nights for 2014 (the most recent year of the historical dataset) and for a chosen year in the past. In order to achive this, the hands-on will be split into two exercises:

### `1_hands-on_find_data_intake.ipynb`

- Search for an appropriate list of data files. The datasets should contain the variables `tasmin` on a daily basis.
- Save your selection as .csv file, so it can be used by another notebook.


### `2_hands-on_tropical_nights_intake_xarray_cmip6.ipynb`

- Read the saved selection and open the two files, which are needed.
- Calculate the number of tropical nights for both years.
- Visualize the results on a map. You can use your preferred visualization package or stick to the example in the demo `use-case_frost_days_intake_xarray_cmip6.ipynb`.

## Contact us

Reach us at <data-pool@dkrz.de>

Commit message:

Link to seperate repo for ESMValTool instructions

README.md, after:

# Using Notebooks for Climate Data Analysis

Welcome to the IS-ENES3 tutorials and use cases repository for the ENES Climate Analytics Services [ECAS](https://portal.enes.org/data/data-metadata-service/climate-analytics-service):
- for the ECAS provided by the German Climate Computing Center [DKRZ](https://www.dkrz.de/) (xarray and dask back-end): find in this repo the training material; we continuously create more material, check the institutional [repo](https://gitlab.dkrz.de/mipdata/tutorials-and-use-cases),
- for the ECAS provided by the Euro-Mediterranean Centre for Climate Change [CMCC](https://ecaslab.cmcc.it/web/home.html) (Ophidia back-end): find the training material in this other [repo](https://github.com/ECAS-Lab/ecas-training).
Find more information on how to apply for the service and get an ECAS account at the [ECAS website](https://portal.enes.org/data/data-metadata-service/climate-analytics-service).

In the "notebooks" folder here you can find [Jupyter](https://jupyter.org/) notebooks with coding examples showing how to use Big Data and High-Performance Computing software at DKRZ.


## Notebooks

[![NBViewer](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jupyter/design/master/logos/Badges/nbviewer_badge.svg)](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/IS-ENES-Data/Climate-data-analysis-service/tree/main/)

We prepared a tutorial on how to use [Intake](https://intake.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) in the DKRZ data pool and several notebooks with use cases. They are independent, just pick up those showing the content you are interested on:

1. **Multimodel Comparison of CMIP6 models**
  * use Python to select data in data-pool,
  * use [python-cdo](https://pypi.org/project/cdo/) and [Xarray](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/) for computation.
2. **Frost Days climate index with CMIP6 models**
  * use [Intake](https://intake.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to search data in data-pool,
  * use [Xarray](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/) for computation.
3. **Summer Days climate index with CMIP6 models**
  * This is an **advanced** notebook. It requires additional installations steps (that is, your own environment to be seen as a kernel at the Jupyterhub, see section "Advanced" below).
  * use [Folium](https://pypi.org/project/folium/) for maps,
  * use [hvPlot](https://pypi.org/project/hvplot/) for plots.
4. **Simple visualization examples for CMIP6**
  * use [Cartopy](https://scitools.org.uk/cartopy/docs/latest/) and [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/) for visualization.
5. **Using ESMValtool directly accessing the DKRZ CMIP and ERA data pool**
  * to reproduce or re-use existing climate analytics. For more information,
    kernel installation instructions, and example notebooks please see
    https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool-JupyterLab


The Jupyter notebooks are meant to run in the [Jupyterhub](https://jupyterhub.dkrz.de/) server of the German Climate Computing Center [DKRZ](https://www.dkrz.de/) which is an [ESGF](https://esgf.llnl.gov/) repository that hosts 4 petabytes of [CMIP6](https://pcmdi.llnl.gov/CMIP6/) model data (more info on the data pool [here](https://www.dkrz.de/up/services/data-management/cmip-data-pool)).

Do not try to run these notebooks in your premise, which is also known as [client-side](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Client-side) computing. It will fail because you will not have direct access to the data pool. Direct access to the data pool is one of the main benefits of the [server-side](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Server-side) data-near computing demonstrated in these tutorials and use cases :relaxed:.


## Quick start

You will *only* need a browser to install and run the above notebooks.

1. Open the [DKRZ Jupyterhub](https://jupyterhub.dkrz.de) in your browser.
2. Login with your DKRZ account (if you do not have one account yet, follow steps 1 and 2 in the service [ECAS website](https://portal.enes.org/data/data-metadata-service/climate-analytics-service#DKRZ)).
3. Pick a profile (``Preset -> Start from Preset Profile``). You need a **prepost** node. Choose profile ``5GB memory, prepost``.

    > NOTE: Everytime you run the notebook you will use some of that RAM, we recomend to click on ``Kernel -> Shutdown kernel`` often so the memory is released. If you   want to run several notebooks at the same time or one notebook several times and you cannot shoutdown the kernel each time, please, choose a job profile with a larger memory.
4. Press "start" and your Jupyter server will start (which it is also known as spawning).
5. Open a terminal in Jupyter (``New -> Terminal``, on the right side)
6. A terminal window opens on the node where your Jupyter is running.
7. Clone the notebooks from GitHub:
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/IS-ENES-Data/Climate-data-analysis-service.git
```
8. Go back to your Jupyter and open a notebook from the notebooks folder:
```
Climate-data-analysis-service/notebooks/
```
9. Make sure you use the Jupyter ``Python 3 unstable`` kernel (``Kernel -> Change Kernel``).


### Alternative

Instead of using the terminal in Jupyter, you can also login to the DKRZ supercomputer *Mistral*:
```console
$ ssh myaccount@mistral.dkrz.de
```

And clone the notebooks repository from GitHub:
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/IS-ENES-Data/Climate-data-analysis-service.git
```

Then, the notebooks will be visible from the Jupyterhub.


## Advanced

The notebook to calculate *summer days* needs its own Jupyter kernel:

1. Open the terminal and run a script to make a new kernel:
```console
$ bash make_kernel.sh
```
2. ... it takes a couple of minutes ...
3. When done then go to you Jupyter and choose the new Kernel we just created ``Notebook Demo``.
4. Now you can run also the *summer days* notebook.


### Further Infos

* Find more in the DKRZ Jupyterhub [documentation](https://jupyterhub.gitlab-pages.dkrz.de/jupyterhub-docs/index.html).
* *prepost* nodes at DKRZ have internet access [info](https://www.dkrz.de/up/systems/mistral/running-jobs/partitions-and-limits).
* ``Python 3 unstable`` kernel: This kernel already contains all the common geoscience packages that we need for our notebooks.
* See in this [video](https://youtu.be/f0wZX9i0uWQ) the main features of the DKRZ Jupterhub and how to use it.
* Advanced users developing their own notebooks can find there how to create their own environments that are visible as kernels by the Jupyterhub.

Besides the information on the Jupyterhub, in these DKRZ [docs](https://www.dkrz.de/up/systems/mistral/programming/jupyter-notebook) you can find how to run Jupyter notebooks directly in the DKRZ server, that is, out of the Jupyterhub (it entails that you install the geoscience packages you need).


## Exercises
In this hands-on we will find, analyze and visualize data from our DKRZ data pool. The goal is to create two  maps, which show the number of tropical nights for 2014 (the most recent year of the historical dataset) and for a chosen year in the past. In order to achive this, the hands-on will be split into two exercises:

### `1_hands-on_find_data_intake.ipynb`

- Search for an appropriate list of data files. The datasets should contain the variables `tasmin` on a daily basis.
- Save your selection as .csv file, so it can be used by another notebook.


### `2_hands-on_tropical_nights_intake_xarray_cmip6.ipynb`

- Read the saved selection and open the two files, which are needed.
- Calculate the number of tropical nights for both years.
- Visualize the results on a map. You can use your preferred visualization package or stick to the example in the demo `use-case_frost_days_intake_xarray_cmip6.ipynb`.

## Contact us

Reach us at <data-pool@dkrz.de>
